# NOTES

## Applications

 - simulations
 - sampling
    extracting "typical" behaviour by selecting random samples from a large corpus of data
 - cryptography
 
## Defining random

There is no such thig as a "random number". Instead
we speak of a _sequence of independent random numbers_
with a specified _distribution_.

A *uniform* distribution is one where each possible number
is equally propable.

Number from 0 to 9 have a 1/10 chance of occurin in a
sequence, **on average**.

Any sequence of a 1M digits is as probably as any other, and
if trhe first 999 999 are `0`, the final digit has 1/10 chance
 to be 0.

## Early days

The production of random numbers using arithmetic operations
was first suggested by Johhn von Neumnann in 1946 with the "middle square method".

## PRNG

The sequence generated by a PRNG is not random, but it *appears* to be.

### LCG

- `m` the modulus with `0 < m`
- `a` the multiplier with `0 <= a < m`
- `c` the increment with `0 <= c < m`
- `X0` the starting value with `0 <= X0 < m`

Then `Xn+1 = (a * Xn + c) % m`.

Congruential sequences have a **cycle** of numbers that is repeated endlessly. The length of this cycle is called the **period**. The period is determined by `m`.

If multiplier equals 1 it's a bad choice since it yields
`Xn = (X0 + cn) % m`.

Because the period is determined by `m`, we want `m` to be large.

#### Choosing good LCG parameters

- `m` shall be large (determines the period)
- `m` shall favour speed of generation
- `m` is typically the word size of the computer such as `2^32`

- `a=1` is bad becauses it doesnt yield a random sequence

# BUFFER

## TOC

1. Demo
2. What is randomness
3. How can a computer achieve randomess (LCG)
4. Current PRNG in use today

Why do we need randomness

- security
- simulation with unknown variables
- games

Wha


- how does a PRNG work?
- whats a seed? how does it work?
- is there such as thing as a bad seed?
- how do you evaluate the quality of a PRNG?
- in LCG how do you choose multiplier, modulo, ...

https://jnordberg.github.io/gif.js/


        const createLCG = () => {
            let state = 1; // seed
            const mod = Math.pow(2, 32)
            const factor = 1664525
            const offset = 1013904223

            return function lcg () {
                state = (factor * state + offset) % mod;
                return state / mod;
            };
        }

        const random = createLCG();